hi so i thought i'd take a look at the
torrid meteor shower
there are many meteor showers throughout
the year and these occur when the earth
sweeps across
uh swarms of debris
from
ancient comets that have lost material
as they orbit around the sun and left a
trail of it behind them
they often leave its uh cometary tail
and bits of that material gradually gets
spread out all around the orbit
and so the earth sometimes intersects
those uh orbits and then the material
gets swept into the earth's atmosphere
and we see it as a lot of meteors
or even bright fireballs
and in the case of the torrid meteors
which occur from october through to
november
we call them the halloween fireballs
because there often are some very very
bright ones
you don't see very many in any
particular
hour so they could be a little
frustrating to watch only about five an
hour
and that's because they're spread out
over a period of two weeks rather than
concentrated all in one burst on a
particular night as is the case with
other meteor showers
and uh notable is that they come into
the earth's atmosphere with a relatively
slow speed
just 28
kilometers per second and that's quite
slow some meteors like the leonids come
in at 70 kilometers per second much
faster
that's because the leonids come in as a
head-on collision so their orbital
motion is added to that of the earth
whereas uh this is much more of an
oblique strike as we shall see
now i said they you've got a lot of
these very bright fireballs as shown in
the picture here
um some of them can be as bright as the
full moon and one that was detected over
poland was as bright as magnitude -17
then the moon the full moon is minus 12
and a half so this is many times
brighter than the full moon and that was
probably a one ton chunk about a meter
in diameter so quite a large rock coming
into the uh earth's atmosphere most of
the material for the tories
though is uh sort of more sort of the
size of gravel or pebbles but
nevertheless they can produce some very
bright fireballs
now they actually occur really is two
overlapping showers in the autumn the
southern torrids from september the 10th
to november the 20th and the northern
tourists october the 20th to december
the 10th
so overlapping but spread apart slightly
the first lot the southern ones are
fragments from comet enki
and the northern ones fragments
of an asteroid designated 2004 cg10
or just tg 10 as i'll call it
now these two are actually associated
with each other um as we'll see
and probably it's the case that tg10 and
nk are either fragments of the same
parent body or one is a fragment of the
other
but really they're part of a huge swarm
that seems to orbit around the sun in
quite a broad path giving us this
two-week uh overlapping
uh encounter and
uh the intensity
of that could vary there can be uh quite
intense every two and a half to three
thousand years but sadly got another
thousand years to wait for the next real
peak we think
uh but lesser intense shows can occur
from time to time
perhaps every 33 years
in 2005 a couple of astronomers
rob suggs and bill cook were using a
10-inch reflector telescope
to video the moon testing their
equipment and they saw a bright flash
up there as marked
just to the left of the bay of rainbows
on the edge of murray imbrium
uh in the highlands there and they
concluded that this was the impact of a
meteor from the torrid meteor stream uh
7th of november of course is entirely
consistent with us passing through the
northern torrids
um and this was probably the first time
that an impact like this had been
videoed and recorded
in action various people had reported
seeing them visually before but this was
the first recorded on video
now we think that both comet enkei five
kilometers in diameter and tg10 just one
kilometer
are both
fragments of a larger parent body
a larger comet that was destroyed in a
huge collision in the asteroid belt
around about 20 to 30 000 years ago
creating this huge stream of matter
that's orbiting around the sun like a
shotgun blast and the earth then takes
its path through it
and takes a couple of weeks to pass
through giving us this intense
bombardment of these rather large gravel
and pebble sized fragments giving us all
the fireballs it's a picture here
the colored one at the bottom is from
spitzer the infrared space telescope and
it's looking at comet nk more or less
head on
um and so we can see there are
two pairs of jets
of material boiling away out into space
leaving this sort of cross-shaped
apparition to it
the photograph at the top is taken
much more
side on showing the normal
cometary nucleus with the trail trailing
tail behind it so much more the normal
picture we have for a comet
but i said the
tg-10 and enkier associated you can see
the parameters of their orbit here i
won't read them all out but you can see
the similarity in all of these numbers
that describe
the position shape and size of the
elliptical orbit that they both occupy
and that's diagram
on the right shows the path of all of
the
members of the swarm
around the um
solar system from a very close approach
to the sun in fact pomedenki is the
second most closely approaching
object in terms of its perihelion to the
sun so it must get very toasty when it's
doing that um and it then goes out to
the outer edge of the asteroid belt at
just over four astronomical units
jupiter's orbit here is at five of
course in the earth at one
um
as the material rotates around on its
orbit in the direction shown by the
arrows and the earth is is also going
the same anti-clockwise direction as
viewed in this diagram you can see that
the
material impacts the earth at a sort of
45 degree angle here um
from the night side the the day side of
course faces the sun and the night side
is out here and so coming in at this 45
degree angle in the early hours of the
morning the material is catching up with
us
as we
go around our orbit and that accounts
for the relatively low
collision speed
then of course the surviving material
goes around the sun and comes back
across the earth's orbit over here and
in fact we get a day side shower of
meteors as well of course you don't see
very many of them when you see the
really bright fireballs
but they are there and they are
detectable
and this is because they're coming in
from the solar side of the sun on the
day side into the earth's atmosphere
here
when they do that
we have two different names for the two
different sub groups
uh the equivalent of the northern and
southern
torrids in the night sky are the beta
torrids and the zeta perseids that occur
in these daytime showers in
the may june and july period
overlapped again in the same way
and it's quite possible that the
tunguska event of
june 30th 1908
where a huge object entered the earth's
atmosphere and exploded over siberia may
well have been a daytime beater taurid
coming in and blowing up it
we think it was probably about 65 meters
in diameter
entered the earth's atmosphere at this
high speed 34 000 miles an hour and
exploded high in the
stratosphere 10 kilometers up creating a
blast that flattened the forest for 50
miles 70 kilometers in every direction
um and uh
exploded with a force of 20 megatons
now some people have argued as to
whether this was a comet or an asteroid
and really it's a little bit of a
debatable question because often these
objects have a
solid iron core with um a mixture of
rock and iron in the middle and a lot of
volatile material around the outside
the volatile material can make them
appear like a comet when it boils away
and account for some of the
fact that you get a lot of water vapor
dumped into the earth's atmosphere
creating extra clouds not to loosen
clouds associated with the destruction
of a comet high in the sky
but the core can still
shatter and explode and create a
a strewn field of uh asteroid fragments
and it certainly seems to be uh evidence
for both sides of that in this
particular case we found uh treat the
trees to be
embedded with bits of stony iron uh
meteorites and we even found
raw iron fragments on the on the ground
at tunguska
in the not too distant past in 2013.
i just wanted to share with you again
some of the descriptions of the tunguska
event itself
from eyewitnesses who were far enough
away to survive and we don't know if
anybody actually uh died
as a result of being underneath the
ground zero of this event
but uh the witnesses that do describe it
say a bluish light nearly as bright as
the sun
moved across the sky leaving a thin
trail
that's a characteristic description of a
uh beta torin bollard
um
coming across the sky
they said close to the horizon there was
a flash producing a billowing cloud
and so the horizon
flash would have been the air bursts
just above their horizons they were far
enough away not to be harmed by it
particularly and a billowing cloud well
a mushroom cloud like uh
explosion as you would see with a
nuclear bomb
um
and
then they say a pillar of fire that cast
a red light on the landscape
that's very interesting because pillars
of fire are one of these uh descriptions
of
things that have
destroyed cities in uh biblical times
and uh maybe this sort of event is
associated with it
um and i have another talk that goes
into some of that
they then say the pillar split into two
and turned black
and then about 10 minutes later there
was a sound similar to artillery fire or
cannon fire some of the descriptions say
and of course that's because
the
considerable distance away and it takes
those 10 minutes
for the sound to travel at 750 miles an
hour to reach them so you can work out
how far away the uh
explosion was
and when the shock wave from the
explosion passed over it knocked quite a
few people off their feet um
indicating a very powerful blast indeed
and that shock wave traveled around the
world
both as air pressure waves and that the
chart here is a barometer reading taken
from the uk
and it's actually in the whipple museum
in cambridge we have the trace of the
tunguska air burst
washing across cambridge and making the
barometers jump about wildly like this
um
and of course then we had the uh the
seismic waves come through the ground as
well and that was detected all over the
world estimating a a five point naught
uh equivalent uh on the richter scale
to the equivalent power of an earthquake
and there are lots of reports of the sky
going dark and glowing in these
very intense sunsets which of course
with the uh dust and uh ash being thrown
into the sky as a result of the forest
fires and the huge
initial blast
now uh
i just want to end with saying you know
do go out and try and observe their the
torrids you have to have some patience
because they're only about five an hour
and half of them will probably be behind
you somewhere where you won't notice
um but if you go out and look for an
hour you should see one
and they can be very very bright and
impressive indeed and because they're
moving a little bit slower than many you
do get a chance to see them properly
and if you do have a think about
what they represent and the tunguska
event and what this could mean if
one of these large tourists came in and
blew up over a more populated area
and with that i'll bring it to an end
thank you
you